Emory Andrew Tate III (born December 1, 1986) is an American-British social media personality, businessman and a former professional kickboxer. Following his kickboxing career, he began offering paid courses and memberships through his website and later rose to fame as an Internet celebrity. His misogynistic commentary has resulted in his suspension from several social media platforms. On December 29, 2022, Tate and his brother, Tristan, were arrested in Romania along with two other suspects. They are charged with human trafficking and forming an organized crime group.

Early life.
Emory Andrew Tate III was born in Washington, D.C. He is of mixed race. His African-American father Emory Tate was a chess International Master. His mother, Eileen Ashleigh, worked as a catering assistant. He has a brother, Tristan. He was raised in Goshen, Indiana, and later in Chicago, Illinois. After his parents divorced, his mother, his brother, and he moved to England, where he was raised as a Christian in his mother's hometown of Luton. He learned to play chess at the age of five and competed in adult tournaments as a child.

Career.

Kickboxing.
Tate started practicing boxing and other martial arts in 2005, and worked in the TV advertising industry to support himself. In November 2008, he was ranked the 7th best light-heavyweight kickboxer in Britain by the International Sport Kickboxing Association (ISKA). In 2009, he gained his first championship when he won the British ISKA Full Contact Cruiserweight Championship in Derby, and was ranked number one in his division in Europe. In 2011, Tate won his first ISKA world title in a rematch against Jean-Luc Benoit via knockout, having previously lost to Benoit by decision. In 2012, Tate lost the Enfusion championship tournament to Franci Grajš. Before his loss, he was ranked second best light-heavyweight kickboxer in the world. In 2013, Tate won his second ISKA world title in a 12-round match against Vincent Petitjean, making him world champion in two weight divisions. He has since retired from combat sports.

Media.

Big Brother and online ventures.
In 2016, while a guest on the British reality show Big Brother, Tate came under scrutiny for his homophobic and racist comments on Twitter. A video apparently showing him hitting a woman with a belt caused him to be removed from the show after only six days. Tate and the woman both said that they were friends and that the actions in the video were consensual. Tate's website offers training courses on accumulating wealth and "male–female interactions". According to the website, he also operated a webcam studio using his girlfriends as employees. Tate and his brother Tristan started the webcam business, employing as many as 75 webcam models to sell "fake sob stories" to male callers, claiming to have made millions of dollars doing so. He later admitted that the business model was a "total scam". Tate operates Hustler's University, a platform where members pay a monthly membership fee to receive instruction on topics such as dropshipping and cryptocurrency trading. The website employed an affiliate marketing program, where members received a commission for recruiting others to the platform. Tate became highly prominent during 2022 by encouraging members of Hustler's University to post large amounts of videos of him to social media platforms in an effort to maximize engagement. As of August 2022, its website had amassed over 100,000 subscribers. That same month, the Irish-American financial services company Stripe pulled out of processing subscriptions for the platform, and Hustler's University shut down its affiliate marketing program. Paul Harrigan, a marketing professor at the University of Western Australia, stated the affiliate program constituted a social media pyramid scheme.

Social media presence.
Tate received attention for his tweets describing his view of what qualifies as sexual harassment amid the Harvey Weinstein sexual abuse cases and for tweeting several statements about his view that sexual assault victims share responsibility for their assaults. In 2017, he was criticized for tweeting that depression "isn't real". Tate initially became known among online far-right circles through his appearances on InfoWars and acquaintances with far-right figures such as Mike Cernovich, Jack Posobiec, and Paul Joseph Watson. He became widely known in mid-2022 and was searched on Google more times than both Donald Trump and COVID-19 that July. He has described himself as "absolutely a sexist" and "absolutely a misogynist". He has stated that women "belong in the home", that they "can't drive", and that they are "given to the man and belong to the man", as well as claiming that men prefer dating 18-year-olds and 19-year-olds because they are likely to have had sex with fewer men. The White Ribbon Campaign, a nonprofit organization opposing male-on-female violence, has called Tate's commentary "extremely misogynistic" and its possible long-term effects on his young male audience "concerning". Hope not Hate, an anti-extremism advocacy group, has commented that Tate's social media presence might present a "dangerous slip road into the far-right" for his audience. In response to criticism, Tate stated that his content includes "many videos praising women" and mainly aims at teaching his audience to avoid "toxic and low value people as a whole". He further stated that he plays a "comedic character" and claimed that people believed "absolutely false narratives" about him. In November 2022, after the acquisition of Twitter by Elon Musk, Tate's Twitter account was unbanned. In December 2022, Tate addressed the environmentalist Greta Thunberg in a tweet extolling his carbon-emitting automobiles and asked for her email address to give her more information. Thunberg replied with the fake email address "smalldickenergy@getalife.com". The exchange received substantial attention on Twitter, becoming the seventh most-liked tweet ever by December 29.

Social media bans.
Three of Tate's Twitter accounts have been suspended at different times. In 2021, an account that he created to evade his previous ban was verified by Twitter, contrary to their policies. The account was subsequently permanently banned, and Twitter said the verification occurred in error. In August 2022, following an online campaign to deplatform him, Tate was permanently banned from Facebook and Instagram, losing 4.7 million followers from the latter. Parent company Meta claimed he had violated their policy on "dangerous organizations and individuals". TikTok, where videos featuring Tate's name as a hashtag have been viewed over 13 billion times, also removed his account after determining that it violated their policies on "content that attacks, threatens, incites violence against, or otherwise dehumanizes an individual or a group". Shortly thereafter, YouTube also suspended his channel citing multiple violations, including hate speech and COVID-19 misinformation, and he later deleted his own Twitch channel. Tate responded to the bans by saying that, while most of his comments were taken out of context, he takes responsibility for how they were received. Media personality Jake Paul denounced Tate's sexism, but criticized the bans as censorship. Tate's content continued to circulate on Facebook, Instagram, and TikTok after the bans via fan accounts. Following the bans, Tate moved to alt-tech platforms Gettr and Rumble making the latter briefly become the most downloaded app on the App Store.

Personal life.
Tate moved from the United Kingdom to Romania in 2017, claiming "40 percent" of the reason for his move was his belief that Romania would be less likely to investigated sexual assault cases. Tate was raised Christian and joined the Romanian Orthodox Church after moving to Romania. He previously claimed to tithe £16,000 (around 89,000 Romanian lei) to the church on a monthly basis and said, "The church in Romania is very powerful and I like having church friends, so I give them a lot of money." When a video of him praying at a mosque in Dubai went viral in October 2022, he announced on his Gettr account that he had converted to Islam.

Legal issues.
On April 11, 2022, the police raided two properties in Ilfov County, Romania, including Tate's mansion, after the U.S. embassy alerted them that an American woman might be held at the property. Two women were found, and claimed they were being held there against their will, sparking a DIICOT investigation into human trafficking and rape. After being questioned for five hours, both brothers were released. Tate later denied any wrongdoing, calling it a case of swatting. On December 29, 2022, the police searched five homes based on a search warrant, including Tate's Ilfov mansion. Four suspects were arrested and detained for a period of 24 hours, including both Tate brothers, a former policewoman, and an unnamed fourth Romanian individual. DIICOT alleges that the suspects "recruited and then sexually abused" six women in Ilfov, and formed a group in early 2021 "with the purpose of recruiting, housing and exploiting women by forcing them to create pornographic content meant to be seen on specialised websites for a cost". Both Tate brothers are charged with human trafficking and forming an organized crime group. One of the four suspects is charged with rape, but was not named by police. Following the 24 hour detention, DIICOT asked a judge that the suspects be held for 30 more days; the judge is expected to issue a ruling later on Friday, December 30, 2022.