Artemis 1 is an ongoing uncrewed Moon-orbiting mission, the first spaceflight in NASA's Artemis program, and the first flight of the agency's Space Launch System (SLS) rocket and the complete Orion spacecraft. Artemis 1 was successfully launched from Kennedy Space Center on 16 November 2022 at 1:47AM eastern time. Formerly known as Exploration Mission-1 (EM-1), the mission was renamed following the creation of the Artemis program. The mission lifted off from Launch Complex 39B at the Kennedy Space Center aboard the Space Launch System rocket. The Orion spacecraft has been launched on a mission of between 26 and 42 days, with at least 6 of those days in a distant retrograde orbit around the Moon. After reaching Earth orbit and performing a trans-lunar injection (burn to the Moon), the mission will deploy ten CubeSat satellites. The Orion spacecraft will later enter a distant retrograde orbit for six days. The Orion spacecraft will then return and reenter the Earth's atmosphere, protected by its heat shield, and splash down in the Pacific Ocean. The mission will certify Orion and the Space Launch System for crewed flights beginning with Artemis 2. After the Artemis 1 mission, Artemis 2 will perform a crewed lunar flyby and Artemis 3 will perform a crewed lunar landing, five decades after the last lunar Apollo mission.
The Orion spacecraft for Artemis 1 was stacked on 20 October 2021, marking the first time a super-heavy-lift vehicle has been stacked inside NASA's Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) since the final Saturn V in 1973. On 17 August 2022, the fully stacked vehicle was rolled out for launch, after a series of delays caused by difficulties in pre-flight testing. The first two launch attempts were canceled, due to faulty reading on 29 August 2022, and a hydrogen leak during fueling on 3 September 2022, respectively.

Planned mission profile

Artemis 1 was launched on the Block 1 variant of the Space Launch System. The Block 1 vehicle consists of a core stage, two five-segment solid rocket boosters (SRBs), and an upper stage. The core stage uses four RS-25D engines, all of which have previously flown on Space Shuttle missions. The core and boosters together produce 39,000 kilonewtons or 8,800,000 pounds of force of thrust at liftoff. The upper stage, known as the Interim Cryogenic Propulsion Stage (ICPS), is based on the Delta Cryogenic Second Stage and is powered by a single RL10B-2 engine on the Artemis 1 mission. Once in orbit, the ICPS fired its engine to perform a trans-lunar injection (TLI) burn, which placed the Orion spacecraft and ten CubeSats on a trajectory to the Moon. Orion then separated from the ICPS and continued its coast into lunar space. Following Orion separation, the ICPS Stage Adapter deployed ten CubeSats that will conduct scientific research and perform technology demonstrations. The Orion spacecraft will spend approximately three weeks in space, including six days in a distant retrograde orbit (DRO) around the Moon.

History

Artemis 1 was outlined by NASA as Exploration Mission 1 (EM-1) in 2012, when it was set to launch in 2017 as the first planned flight of the Space Launch System and the second uncrewed test flight of the Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle. In initial plans for EM-1, Orion was to perform a circumlunar trajectory during a seven-day mission. Around September 2011, SLS's first launch was delayed from before the end of 2016 to sometime in 2017, the first of at least fifteen more delays.In January 2013, it was announced that the Orion spacecraft's service module was to be built by the European Space Agency, and named the European Service Module. In mid-November 2014, construction of the SLS core stage began at NASA's Michoud Assembly Facility (MAF). In January 2015, NASA and Lockheed Martin announced that the primary structure in the Orion spacecraft used on Artemis 1 would be up to 25% lighter compared to the previous one (EFT-1). This would be achieved by reducing the number of cone panels from six to three, reducing the total number of welds from 19 to 7, saving the additional mass of the weld material. Other savings would be due to revising its various components and wiring. For Artemis 1, the Orion spacecraft will be outfitted with a complete life support system and crew seats, but will be left uncrewed.Originally, the SLS version used on the first, second and third missions was intended to use the SLS's Exploration Upper Stage; however, due to the stage's extreme delays, in April 2018 NASA decided to switch from Block 1B to the less powerful Block 1 SLS for these three missions. The Exploration Upper Stage will be used instead from the SLS's fourth mission onwards. In February 2017, NASA investigated a crewed launch as the first SLS flight. It would have had a crew of two astronauts and the flight time would have been shorter than the uncrewed version. However, after a months-long feasibility study, NASA rejected the proposal, claiming cost as the primary issue, and continued with the plan to fly the first SLS mission uncrewed.In March 2019, then-NASA administrator Jim Bridenstine proposed moving the Orion spacecraft from SLS to commercial rockets, either the Falcon Heavy or Delta IV Heavy, to comply with the schedule. The mission would require two launches: one to place the Orion spacecraft into orbit around the Earth, and a second carrying an upper stage. The two would then dock while in Earth orbit and the upper stage would ignite to send Orion to the Moon. The idea was eventually scrapped. One challenge with this option would be carrying out that docking, as Orion will not carry a docking mechanism until Artemis 3. The concept was shelved in mid-2019, due to another study's conclusion that it would further delay the mission.

Ground testing

The core stage for Artemis 1, built at Michoud Assembly Facility by Boeing, had all four engines attached in November 2019 and was declared finished one month later. The core stage left the facility to undergo the Green Run test series at Stennis Space Center, consisting of eight tests of increasing complexity:
Modal testing (vibration tests)
Avionics (electronic systems)
Fail-safe systems
Propulsion (without firing of the engines)
Thrust vector control system (moving and rotating engines)
Launch countdown simulation
Wet dress rehearsal, with propellant
Static fire of the engines for eight minutesThe first test was performed in January 2020, and subsequent Green Run tests proceeded without issue. On 16 January 2021, a year later, the eighth and final test was performed, but the engine shut down after running for one minute, with no sign of damage to the engine. This was caused by pressure in the hydraulic system used for the engines' thrust vector control system dropping below the limits set for the test. However, the limits were conservative – if such an anomaly occurred in launch, the rocket would still fly normally. The last test was performed again successfully on 18 March 2021. The core subsequently departed the Stennis Space Center on 24 April 2021, on route to the Kennedy Space Center.

Assembly

The Interim Cryogenic Propulsion Stage was the first part of the SLS to be delivered to the Kennedy Space Center in July 2017. Three years later, all of the SLS's solid rocket booster segments were shipped by train to the Kennedy Space Center on 12 June 2020, and the SLS launch vehicle stage adapter (LVSA) was delivered by barge one month later on 29 July 2020. The assembly of the SLS took place at the Vehicle Assembly Building's High Bay 3, beginning with the placement of the two bottom solid rocket booster segments on 23 November 2020. Assembly of the boosters was temporarily paused due to the core stage Green Run test delays before being resumed on 7 January 2021, and the boosters' stacking was completed by 2 March 2021.The SLS core stage for the mission, CS-1, arrived at the launch site on the Pegasus barge on 27 April 2021 after the successful conclusion of Green Run tests. It was moved to the VAB low bay for refurbishment and stacking preparations on 29 April 2021. The stage was then stacked with its boosters on 12 June 2021. The stage adapter was stacked on the Core Stage on 22 June 2021. The ICPS upper stage was stacked on 6 July 2021. Following the completion of umbilical retract testing and integrated modal testing, the Orion stage adapter with ten secondary payloads was stacked atop the upper stage on 8 October 2021.The Artemis 1 Orion spacecraft began fueling and pre-launch servicing in the Multi-Payload Processing Facility on 16 January 2021, following a handover to NASA Exploration Ground Systems (EGS). On 20 October 2021, the Orion spacecraft, encapsulated under the launch abort system and aerodynamic cover, was rolled over to the VAB and stacked atop the SLS rocket, finishing the stacking of the Artemis 1 vehicle in High Bay-3. During a period of extensive integrated testing and checkouts, one of the four RS-25 engine controllers failed, requiring a replacement and delaying the first rollout of the rocket.

Launch preparations

On 17 March 2022, Artemis 1 rolled out of High Bay 3 from the Vehicle Assembly Building for the first time in order to perform a pre-launch wet dress rehearsal (WDR). The initial WDR attempt, on 3 April, was scrubbed due to a mobile launcher pressurization problem. A second attempt to complete the test was scrubbed on 4 April, after problems with supplying gaseous nitrogen to the launch complex, liquid oxygen temperatures, and a vent valve stuck in a closed position.During preparations for a third attempt, a helium check valve on the ICPS upper stage was kept in a semi-open position by a small piece of rubber originating from one of the mobile launcher's umbilical arms, forcing test conductors to delay fueling the stage until the valve could be replaced in the VAB. The third attempt to finish the test did not include fueling the upper stage. The rocket's liquid oxygen tank started loading successfully. However, during the loading of liquid hydrogen on the core stage, a leak was discovered on the tail service mast umbilical plate, located on the mobile launcher at the base of the rocket, forcing another early end to the test.NASA elected to roll the vehicle back to the VAB to repair the hydrogen leak and the ICPS helium check valve, while also upgrading the nitrogen supply at LC-39B after prolonged outages on the three previous wet dress rehearsals. Artemis 1 was rolled back to the VAB on 26 April. After the repairs and upgrades were complete the Artemis 1 vehicle rolled out to LC-39B for a second time on 6 June to complete the test.During the fourth wet dress rehearsal attempt on 20 June, the rocket was successfully fully loaded with propellant on both stages, but due to a hydrogen leak on the quick-disconnect connection of the tail service mast umbilical, the countdown could not reach the planned T-9.3 seconds mark and was stopped automatically at T-29 seconds. NASA mission managers soon determined they had completed almost all planned test objectives and declared the WDR campaign complete.On 2 July, the Artemis 1 stack was rolled back to the VAB for final launch preparations and to fix the hydrogen leak on the quick disconnect, ahead of a launch targeted in two launch windows: 29 August and 5 September. The SLS passed flight readiness review on 23 August, checking out five days before the first launch opportunity.

Initial launch attempts
Fueling was scheduled to commence just after midnight on 29 August 2022, but was delayed an hour due to offshore storms, only beginning at 1:13 am EDT. Prior to the planned launch at 8:33 am, Engine 3 of the rocket's four engines was observed to be above the maximum allowable temperature limit for launch. Other technical difficulties involved an eleven-minute communications delay between the spacecraft and ground control, a fuel leak, and a crack on the insulating foam of the connection joints between the liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen tanks. NASA scrubbed the launch after an unplanned hold and the two-hour launch window expired. An investigation revealed that a sensor not used to determine launch readiness was faulty, and displayed an erroneously high temperature for Engine 3.Following the first attempt, a second launch attempt was scheduled for the afternoon of 3 September. The launch window would have opened at 2:17 pm and lasted for two hours. The launch was scrubbed at 11:17 am due to a fuel supply line leak in a service arm connecting to the engine section. The cause of the leak was uncertain. Mission operators investigated whether an overpressurization of the liquid hydrogen line of the quick-disconnect interface during the launch attempt may have damaged a seal, allowing hydrogen to escape. Hydrogen is a more challenging fuel because it is 8x smaller than methane, which is the fuel for the SpaceX Starship.
Launch operators decided on the date for the next launch attempt; the earliest possible opportunity was 19 September until mission managers declared that 27 September, and then 30 September, would be the absolute earliest date, NASA having successfully repaired the leak. A launch in September would have required that the Eastern Range of the United States Space Force agree to an extension on certification of the rocket's flight termination system, which destroys the rocket should it move off-course and towards a populated area; this was carried out on 22 September. However, unfavorable forecasts of the trajectory of then-Tropical Storm Ian led launch managers to call off the 27 September launch attempt and begin preparations for the stack's rollback to the VAB. On the morning of 26 September, the decision was made to roll back later that evening. On 12 November, following another delay due to Hurricane Nicole, NASA launch managers decided to request launch opportunities for 16 and 19 November. They originally requested an opportunity for the 14th, but were prevented by then-Tropical Storm Nicole. As the storm approached, NASA decided to leave the rocket at the launch pad, citing a low probability that wind speeds would exceed the rocket's design limits. Wind speeds were expected to reach 29 mph or 47 km/h, with gusts up to 46 mph or 74 km/h. Nicole made landfall as a category 1 hurricane on 9 November, with sustained wind speeds at Kennedy Space Center reaching 85 mph or 137 km/h, and gusts up to 100 mph or 160 km/h, exceeding the rocket's design specifications. After the storm cleared, NASA inspected the rocket for physical damage and conducted electronic health checks. On 15 November, the mission management team gave a "go" to begin fully preparing for launch, and the main tanking procedures began at 3:30PM

Launch

At 1:47AM on 16 November 2022, Artemis 1 successfully launched from Launch Complex 39B at the Kennedy Space Center, the first time in nearly 50 years NASA has launched a rocket intended for human travel to the moon since Apollo 17. This launch also marks the first time since Ares I-X that a rocket has launched from Launch Complex 39B. The Orion spacecraft and ICPS were both placed into a nominal orbit, after separating from the Space Launch System, achieving orbit approximately 8 minutes after launch.

Payloads

The Orion spacecraft is carrying three astronaut-like mannequins equipped with sensors to provide data on what crew members may experience during a trip to the Moon. The first mannequin, called "Captain Moonikin Campos" (named after Arturo Campos, a NASA engineer during the Apollo program), occupies the commander's seat inside Orion and is equipped with two radiation sensors in his Orion Crew Survival System suit, which astronauts will wear during launch, entry, and other dynamic phases of their missions. His seat also has sensors to record data on acceleration and vibration data during the mission.
Alongside Moonikin are two phantom torsos: Helga and Zohar, who will take part in the Matroshka AstroRad Radiation Experiment (MARE), in which NASA, together with the German Aerospace Center and the Israel Space Agency, will measure the radiation exposure during the mission. Zohar is shielded with the Astrorad radiation vest and equipped with sensors to determine radiation risks. Helga does not wear a vest. The phantoms will measure the radiation exposure of body location, with both passive and active dosimeters distributed at sensitive and high stem cell-concentration tissues. The test is to provide data on radiation levels during missions to the Moon while testing the effectiveness of the vest. In addition to the three mannequins, Orion carries NASA's Snoopy and ESA's Shaun the Sheep.
Ten low-cost CubeSat missions fly as secondary payloads, mounted at Orion's stage adapter. Each are in a six-unit configuration and reside within the Stage Adapter, above the second stage. Ten CubeSats were ultimately installed on the Stage Adapter by October 2021. Two were selected through NASA's Next Space Technologies for Exploration Partnerships, three through the Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate, two through the Science Mission Directorate, and three from submissions by NASA's international partners. These CubeSats are:
ArgoMoon, designed by Argotec and coordinated by the Italian Space Agency, is designed to image the Interim Cryogenic Propulsion Stage.
BioSentinel contains yeast cards that will be rehydrated in space, designed to detect, measure, and compare the effects of deep space radiation.
CubeSat for Solar Particles, designed by the Southwest Research Institute, will orbit the Sun in interplanetary space and study its particles and magnetic fields.
EQUULEUS, designed by Japan's JAXA and the University of Tokyo, will image the Earth's plasmasphere, impacts on the Moon's far side, and small trajectory maneuvers near the Moon.
Lunar IceCube, a lunar orbiter designed by Morehead State University, will uses its infrared spectrometer to detect water and organic compounds in the lunar surface and exosphere.
Lunar Polar Hydrogen Mapper, a lunar orbiter designed by Arizona State University, will search for evidence of lunar water ice inside permanently shadowed craters using its neutron detector.
Near-Earth Asteroid Scout, designed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, is a solar sail that will flyby a near-Earth asteroid.
OMOTENASHI, designed by JAXA, is a lunar probe attempting to land using solid rocket motors.
LunIR, designed by Lockheed Martin, is to flyby the Moon and collect its surface thermography.
Team Miles, designed by Fluid and Reason LLC, will demonstrate low-thrust plasma propulsion in deep space.The remaining three slots are empty, as the following three satellites were not ready in time for the Artemis 1 mission:
Cislunar Explorers would demonstrate the viability of water electrolysis propulsion and interplanetary optical navigation to orbit the Moon. It was designed by Cornell University, Ithaca, New York.
Lunar Flashlight is a lunar orbiter that would seek exposed water ice, and map its concentration at the 1–2 kilometer or 0.6 to 1.2 mile scale within the permanently shadowed regions of the lunar south pole.
Earth Escape Explorer would demonstrate long-distance communications while in heliocentric orbit. It was designed by the University of Colorado Boulder. It was one of three CubeSat missions to miss the integration window to fly on Artemis I and will need to find an alternative ride to the Moon.Besides these functional payloads, Artemis 1 also carries commemorative stickers, patches, seeds and flags from contractors and space agencies around the world. A technology demonstration called Callisto, named after the mythical figure associated with Artemis, developed by Lockheed Martin in collaboration with Amazon and Cisco, is also in flight aboard Orion on Artemis 1. Callisto will use video conferencing software to transmit audio and video from mission control and use the Alexa virtual assistant to respond to the audio messages. In addition, members of the public are able to submit messages to be displayed on Callisto during the Artemis 1 mission.

Media outreach
The Artemis 1 mission patch was created by NASA designers of the SLS, Orion spacecraft and Exploration Ground Systems teams. The silver border represents the color of the Orion spacecraft; at the center, the SLS and Orion are depicted. Three lightning towers surrounding the rocket symbolize Launch Complex 39B, from which Artemis 1 will launch. The red and blue mission trajectories encompassing the white full Moon represent Americans and people in the European Space Agency who work on Artemis 1.The Artemis 1 flight is frequently marketed as the beginning of Artemis's "Moon to Mars" program, though there is no concrete plan for a crewed mission to Mars within NASA as of 2022. To raise public awareness, NASA made a website for the public to get a digital boarding pass of the mission. The names submitted are written into a hard drive inside the Orion spacecraft. Also aboard the capsule is a digital copy of the 14,000 entries for the Moon Pod Essay Contest hosted by Future Engineers for NASA.

Thanks for listening to Artemis 1 on spokewiki, recorded November 16, 2022.