Binance is a cryptocurrency exchange which is the largest exchange in the world in terms of daily trading volume of
cryptocurrencies. It was founded in 2017 and is registered in the Cayman Islands.

Binance was founded by Changpeng Zhao, a developer who had previously created high frequency trading software. Binance
was initially based in China, but later moved its headquarters out of China following the Chinese government's
increasing regulation of cryptocurrency.

In 2021, Binance was put under investigation by both the United States Department of Justice and Internal Revenue
Service on allegations of money laundering and tax offenses. The UK's Financial Conduct Authority ordered Binance to
stop all regulated activity in the United Kingdom in June 2021.In 2021, Binance shared client data, including names and
addresses, with the Russian government.

History

2013–2017: company beginnings and move out of China
CEO Changpeng Zhao had previously founded Fusion Systems in 2005 in Shanghai; the company built high-frequency trading
systems for stockbrokers. In 2013, he joined Blockchain.info as the third member of the cryptocurrency wallet's team. He
also worked at OKCoin as CTO for less than a year, a platform for spot trading between fiat and digital assets.The
company was founded in 2017 in China but moved its servers and headquarters out of China and into Japan in advance of
the Chinese government ban on cryptocurrency trading in September 2017.

2018–2019: launch of stable coin and security breach
In January 2018 it was the largest cryptocurrency exchange with a market capitalization of $1.3 billion, a title it had
retained as late as April 2021, despite competition from Coinbase, among others.In March 2018, Binance announced its
intentions to open an office in Malta after stricter regulations in Japan and China. In April 2018, Binance signed a
memorandum of understanding with the government of Bermuda. Months later, a similar memorandum was signed with the Malta
Stock Exchange to develop a platform for trading security tokens. In 2019, company announced Binance Jersey, an
independent entity from its parent Binance.com exchange, with the aim to expand its European influence. Jersey based
exchange offers fiat-to-cryptocurrency pairs, including the Euro and the British pound.In August 2018, Binance along
with three other big exchanges raised $32 million for a stablecoin project. The idea of stable coins is to provide a
cryptocurrency without the notorious volatility of Bitcoin and other popular digital assets.In January 2019, Binance
announced that it had partnered with Israel-based payment processor Simplex to enable cryptocurrency purchases with
debit and credit cards, including Visa and Mastercard. The purchases are subject to Simplex's local bank policies and
are limited to Bitcoin, Ethereum, Litecoin and Ripple's XRP.On 7 May 2019, Binance revealed that it had been the victim
of a "large scale security breach" in which hackers had stolen 7,000 Bitcoin worth around U.S.$40 million at the time.
Binance CEO Changpeng Zhao said the hackers "used a variety of techniques, including phishing, viruses and other
attacks" and structured their transaction "in a way that passed our existing security checks." Binance halted further
withdrawals and deposits but allowed trading to continue. The site pledged to reimburse customers through its "Secure
Asset Fund for Users (SAFU)". Withdrawals resumed by 19 May.In September 2019, the exchange began offering perpetual
futures contracts, allowing leverage as high as 125 times the value of the contracts. In November 2019, Binance
announced it was acquiring Indian bitcoin exchange WazirX, which became disputed in August 2022 when Binance founder
Zhao claimed the deal was never signed.

2020–2022: acquisitions and investments
On 21 February 2020, the Malta Financial Services Authority (MFSA) issued a public statement responding to media reports
referring to Binance as a 'Malta-based' cryptocurrency company. The statement noted that Binance "is not authorized by
the MFSA to operate in the cryptocurrency sphere and is therefore not subject to regulatory oversight by the MFSA." The
MFSA added that it was "assessing if Binance has any activities in Malta which may not fall within the realm of
regulatory oversight."In March 2020, Binance acquired CoinMarketCap. Although the price of the acquisition was not
disclosed, it’s reported to be up to $400 million. CoinMarketCap was founded in 2013 and is one of the largest
cryptocurrency online tracking tools.On 28 October 2020, Forbes staff released leaked documents showing that Binance and
Changpeng Zhao created an elaborate corporate structure designed to intentionally deceive United States regulators and
secretly profit from cryptocurrency investors located in the country. Binance officially blocks access from IP addresses
located in the United States, but "potential customers would be taught how to evade geographic restrictions", Forbes
claimed.In May 2021 it was reported that Binance was under investigation by both the Internal Revenue Service and the
United States Department of Justice on allegations of money laundering and tax offenses.In February 2022, Binance took a
$200 million stake in Forbes.In March 2022, amidst the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Binance's CEO Changpeng Zhao,
refused to ban users from Russia, citing "financial freedom". Binance later softened their opposition to this measure,
and also pointed to their donation of $10 million for humanitarian needs in Ukraine.In April 2022, Reuters reported
that, in 2021, Binance shared information with Rosfinmonitoring about funds raised by jailed Russian opposition leader
Alexei Navalny's network.On 27 May 2022, Binance announced the registration of its legal entity in Italy, and has plans
of opening offices and expanding the local team in the area. CEO Changpeng Zhao also shared information regarding
Binance's registration with France's market regulator. The company is also seeking registration in more European
countries, such as Switzerland, Sweden, Spain, Netherlands, Portugal and Austria.On 13 June 2022 Binance announced
that (for an unspecified time period) users would be unable to withdraw their funds held in Bitcoin, amid the background
of major falls in the value of cryptocurrencies. 2 hours after the announcing the temporary suspension of bitcoin
withdrawals, Bitcoin withdrawals were resumed.Binance has a strong brand presence in Africa. Binance sponsored the
Africa Cup of Nations in 2021. It is also taking crypto education to many countries on the continent.Binance invested
US$500 million towards the acquisition of Twitter by Elon Musk that completed in October 2022. Following the investment,
the company announced the creation of a team to work on how blockchain and cryptocurrencies could be helpful to
Twitter.On 8 November 2022, Binance offered to buy rival cryptocurrency exchange FTX's non-US operations (FTX.com) to
help cover the latter's liquidity crunch. Binance backed out of the deal the next day citing concerns about FTX's
business practices and investigations by US financial regulators.

Binance coin (BNB)
Throughout its history, the company has launched two cryptocurrencies which it developed itself: Binance Coin (BNB), and
BinanceUSD (BUSD). BNB launched July 2017, which started as an Ethereum token and later moved to Binance Smart Chain (
BSC), launched September 2020. BSC later merged with the older Binance Chain and was rebranded into BNB chain. BNB Chain
operates using "Proof of Staked Authority", a combination of proof of stake and proof of authority. It has 21 approved
validators. As of 2021, Binance Coin was the cryptocurrency with the third highest market capitalization. Binance allows
its users to pay fees on its exchange with BNB.BSC supports smart contracts and is compatible with the ethereum virtual
machine (EVM).There have been multiple criticisms of Binance Smart Chain concerning its level of centralisation, which
had led to several exploits on the network.

BUSD
BUSD, or BinanceUSD is a US Dollar pegged stablecoin issued by Binance. According to Binance it is backed 1:1 by a
reserve of US Dollars and was founded by them in partnership with Paxos who is the issuer of the token. Paxos holds the
reserves only partially in cash deposited in their US bank accounts with the other part held in U.S. Treasuries. BUSD is
natively issued on the Ethereum blockchain by Paxos. Binance creates Binance-Peg BUSD by locking the natively ERC-20
BUSD in a smart contract on the Ethereum Blockchain and issuing Binance-Peg BUSD equivalent to the amount held in
reserve in the smart contract. Binance-Peg BUSD is native to BNB chain.BUSD is a widely used stablecoin being the 3rd
largest stablecoin by market capitalisation following USDT and USDC.

Legal status

United States
In 2019, Binance was banned in the United States on regulatory grounds. In response, Binance and other investors opened
Binance.US, a separate exchange designed to comply with all applicable US laws. The US variant has been praised for
offering a very similar interface and feature set to its worldwide counterpart. However, it is banned in six states. In
May 2021, Bloomberg News reported that Binance was under investigation by the United States Department of Justice and
Internal Revenue Service for money-laundering and tax evasion. In June 2022, the US Securities and Exchange commission
launched an enquiry into Binance to determine if the company's 2017 ICO of BNB tokens amounted to an illegal sale of a
security.

United Kingdom
In June 2021, Binance was ordered by the UK's Financial Conduct Authority to stop all regulated activity in the United
Kingdom. In January 2021, the FCA began requiring firms dealing with cryptocurrency to register in order to comply with
anti-money laundering rules. As Binance is not compliant with these rules, it is being forced to cease operations within
the coming weeks.

Japan
On June 25, 2021, Japan's Financial Services Agency warned Binance that it was not registered to do business in Japan.
This was the second notice Binance received from the FSA. Previously, a similar warning was issued on March 23, 2018.

Italy
In July 2021, Italy's Commissione Nazionale per le Società e la Borsa ordered Binance to be blocked from operating. In
May 2022, Binance gained regulatory approval in Italy, allowing the company to provide digital asset services in the
country.

France
In May 2022, Binance gained regulatory approval in France, allowing the company to provide digital asset services in the
country. France is the first European country to give Binance regulatory approval.

Germany
In April 2021, the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority in Germany warned that the company risked fines for not
releasing an investor prospectus for the stock tokens it has issued.

Thailand
Thailand's Securities and Exchange Commission filed a criminal complaint against Binance on July 2, 2021, "for
commission of offence under the Emergency Decree on Digital Asset Business B.E. 2561 (2018)". Additionally, Thailand's
SEC cited Binance for operating without a license, a violation of Section 26 of the Digital Asset Businesses Emergency
Decree.

Canada
On March 17, 2022, Binance has confirmed in an undertaking to the Ontario Securities Commission that it would stop
opening new accounts and halting trading in existing accounts for users in Ontario.

Netherlands
In April 2022, The Dutch central bank announced a $3.35 million fine for Binance due to offering services within the
Netherlands without being registered in the country. The fine was issued to the company after an official warning was
issued to the company during August 2021.

India
In August 2022, India's Enforcement Directorate froze the assets of WazirX, an exchange owned by Binance, as part of a
money laundering investigation. Following the event, CEO Zhao clarified that they never owned WazirX or owned any equity
in Zanmai Labs—the operating entity of WazirX—citing "a few issues" that prevented the completion of the acquisition.
The co-founder of WazirX, Nischal Shetty, disputed Zhao's claims asserting that Binance had indeed acquired them.