Powerball is an American lottery game offered by 45 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin
Islands. It is coordinated by the Multi-State Lottery Association (MUSL). From its inaugural drawing on April 19, 1992,
until August 21, 2021, Powerball drawings were held twice a week (Wednesday and Saturday); a third weekly drawing (held
Mondays) was added on August 23, 2021. Drawings are held every Monday, Wednesday and Saturday evening at 10:59 p.m.
Eastern Time, at Florida Lottery headquarters in Tallahassee. Since October 7, 2015, the game has used a 5/69 (white
balls) + 1/26 (Powerballs) matrix from which winning numbers are chosen, resulting in odds of 1 in 292,201,338 of
winning a jackpot per play. Each play costs $2 or $3 with the Power Play option (originally, Powerball plays cost $1;
when PowerPlay began, such games were $2.). The official cutoff for ticket sales is 10:00 p.m. Eastern Time; some
lotteries cut off sales earlier. The drawings are held at the Florida Lottery's studio in Tallahassee. Powerball's
minimum advertised jackpot is $20 million (annuity); Powerball's annuity is paid in 30 graduated installments or winners
may choose a lump sum payment instead. One lump sum payment will be less than the total of the 30 annual payments
because of the time value of money and also because one check for a much larger sum will be taxed at a greater rate than
30 checks each at a much lower sum will be taxed.

On January 13, 2016, Powerball produced the largest lottery jackpot in history; the $1.586 billion jackpot was split by
three tickets sold in Chino Hills, California; in Munford, Tennessee; and in Melbourne Beach, Florida.The numbers were
originally drawn in West Des Moines, Iowa before moving to Universal Studios Florida in Orlando. Drawings moved to their
current home in Tallahassee in 2012.

Powerball replaced Lotto America in April 1992; Mega Millions replaced The Big Game 10 years later.

Alabama, Alaska, Hawaii, Nevada, and Utah do not sell lottery tickets.

History.

Powerball's predecessor began in 1988; the multi-state game was known as Lotto America. The game, and name, were changed
to Powerball on April 19, 1992; its first drawing was held April 22.
Dr. Edward J. Stanek was president of the Iowa Lottery and one of two men, along with Steve Caputo, who came up with the
Powerball game.

When it was launched in 1992 Powerball became the first game to use two drums. Using two drums to draw numbers from
offers more manipulation by simultaneously allowing high jackpot odds, numerous prize levels and low overall odds of
winning (as explained later, a ticket can win by matching only one number). The two-drum concept was suggested by Steve
Caputo of the Oregon Lottery. The two-drum concept has since been used by The Big Game (now Mega Millions) in the US,
Australia's Powerball, Thunderball in the UK, Eurojackpot and EuroMillions.Through 2008, Powerball drawings usually were
held at Screenscape Studios in West Des Moines, Iowa. The drawings' host was longtime Iowa radio personality Mike Pace,
who had hosted MUSL drawings since Lotto America began in 1988. In 1996, Powerball went "on the road" for the first
time, holding five remote drawings at the Summer Olympics in Atlanta. A few weeks later, Georgia became the only
jurisdiction to leave Powerball (Maine, which joined MUSL in 1990, left when Powerball began). In August 1996, Georgia
joined the then-new The Big Game, then the other major U.S. lottery group. It planned to sell tickets for both games for
the rest of 1996; but within days Georgia was removed from MUSL, not to return until the 2010 cross-sell expansion.
On November 2, 1997, the annuity was changed from 20 to 25 yearly payments; the cash option was added. The annuity
comprises 30 graduated payments, increasing 5% annually.

In 1998, Florida was given permission by its government to participate in a multi-state game. It was set to offer
Powerball; but in early 1999, new governor Jeb Bush prevented Florida from joining since he believed Powerball would
hurt the existing Florida Lottery games. In 2008, Governor Charlie Crist finally allowed Florida to join MUSL, on Jan 4,

2009.

On March 7, 2001, an optional multiplier (called Power Play) was added, allowing players to multiply non-jackpot
winnings by up to five by paying an extra $1 per game. A wheel was introduced to select the Power Play multiplier for
each drawing (the next year, the 1x was removed from the Power Play wheel.)

2009: Florida became host to drawings.

With the start of Powerball sales in Florida on January 4, 2009 (with its first drawing on January 7), the matrices
changed to 5/59 + 1/39 (adding four white ball numbers and dropping three red balls). This changed the jackpot
probability from 1:146 million to 1:195 million; the overall probability became 1:35.

Based on statistical projections, the average jackpot win increased from $95 million to $141 million. Over 3.5 million
additional prizes were expected to be won yearly due to the change in probability. The starting jackpot increased to $20
million, with minimum rollovers of $5 million. The jackpot contribution increased from 30.3% to 32.5% of total sales.
The Power Play option was modified; second prize, usually $200,000, was given an automatic 5x multiplier, making the 5+0
prize $1 million cash. The bonus second prize if the jackpot exceeded its previous record by $25 million, triggered only
twice, was eliminated with the 2012 format change.

The conditions for Florida joining Powerball included a move of the live drawings from Iowa to Universal Studios in
Orlando. The three hosts rotating announcing duties from Universal Studios were Tracy Wiu, Elizabeth Hart and Scott
Adams (MUSL headquarters remained in Iowa, where its other draws are held). The wheel that was used to determine the
Power Play multiplier was retired when the drawings moved to Florida; a random number generator (RNG) was used until the
2012 format change.

Arkansas became the 33rd MUSL member on October 31, 2009, the last to join before the 2010 cross-sell expansion. The
Ohio Lottery added Powerball on April 16, 2010, it joined Mega Millions (along with New York) years earlier, when The
Big Game added Mega Millions to its name.

2010 cross-sell expansion

In March 2009, it was reported that New Jersey, already a Mega Millions member, sought permission to join Powerball.
Shortly after, discussions were revealed about allowing each US lottery to offer both games. On October 13, the Mega
Millions consortium and MUSL reached an agreement in principle to cross-sell Mega Millions and Powerball. In November,
MUSL signed an agreement to start streaming Powerball drawings online.On January 31, 2010, the date of the cross-sell
expansion, Mega Millions and MUSL each added lotteries; eight Powerball members added Mega Millions by May. The Montana
Lottery joined Mega Millions on March 1, 2010. Nebraska added Mega Millions on March 20, 2010, Oregon followed on March
28, 2010, Arizona joined Mega Millions on April 18, 2010, Maine added Mega Millions on May 9, 2010, Colorado and South
Dakota joined Mega Millions on May 16, 2010. The U.S. Virgin Islands joined Mega Millions in October 2010.

Before the agreement, the only places that sold both Mega Millions and Powerball tickets were retailers straddling a
border; one retailer on the Sharon, Pennsylvania/Masury, Ohio border sold both Mega Millions (via the Ohio Lottery) and
Powerball (Pennsylvania) before the agreement and continued to be the only retailer to sell tickets for both
lotteries.Illinois joining Powerball on the expansion date, it became the second multi-jurisdictional lottery game (
after Mega Millions, which Illinois already participated in) whose drawings were carried nationally. Both games'
drawings were simulcast via Chicago cable superstation WGN-TV through its national WGN America feed. WGN-TV aired
Illinois Lottery drawings nationally from 1992 to 2015 after acquiring broadcast rights from Chicago's Fox
owned-and-operated station WFLD in 1988, which took the rights from WGN-TV in 1987. Powerball drawings were aired on
WGN-TV and WGN America on Wednesday and Saturday immediately following the station's 9:00 p.m. (Central Time) newscast
with the Mega Millions drawings being aired Tue and Fri evenings after the newscast. WGN served as a default carrier of
Mega Millions or Powerball where no local television station carries either multi-jurisdictional lottery's drawings.
On March 13, 2010, New Jersey became the first previous Mega Millions-only member (just before the cross-selling
expansion) to produce a jackpot-winning Powerball ticket. It was worth over $211 million in annuity payments; it was
sold in Morris Plains. On May 28, 2010, North Carolina became the first previous MUSL member (just before the
cross-selling expansion) to produce a jackpot-winning Mega Millions ticket; that jackpot was $12 million (annuity).
On June 2, 2010, Ohio won a Powerball jackpot; it became the first lottery selling either Mega Millions or Powerball (
when 2010 began) to provide a jackpot-winning ticket for its newer game. The ticket was worth a $261 million annuity; it
was sold in Sunbury. Ohio's second Powerball jackpot-winning ticket, sold for the June 23, 2010 drawing, was part of
another first; since Montana also provided a jackpot winner for that drawing, it was the first time a jackpot was shared
through lotteries which sold competing games before the cross-selling expansion, as Montana sold only Powerball before
the expansion date.

2012 format change

On January 15, 2012, the price of each basic Powerball play doubled to $2, while PowerPlay games became $3; the minimum
jackpot doubled to $40 million. A non-jackpot play matching the five white balls won $1 million. The red balls decreased
from 39 to 35. The drawings were moved from Universal Studios Orlando to the Florida Lottery's studios in Tallahassee.
Sam Arlen began his tenure as host in 2012, with Laura W. Johnson served as Arlen’s co-host.These changes were made to
increase the frequency of nine-figure jackpots; a Powerball spokesperson believed a $500 million jackpot was feasible (
it became a reality within the year,) and that the first $1 billion jackpot in US history would occur by 2012 (though it
didn't occur until 4 years later.) Less than three months after the Powerball changes, Mega Millions' jackpot reached
$656,000,000 despite remaining a $1-per-play game. The random Power Play multiplier was retired for a set, fixed dollar
amount payout. The $25 million rollover "cap" (creating larger 5+0 prizes) was eliminated.

California joined on April 8, 2013; it has never offered the Power Play option, as all payouts in California Lottery
drawing games, by law, are parimutuel. Mega Millions, which became available in California in 2005, offers its Megaplier
in its other 45 jurisdictions.

On January 22, 2014, the variable Power Play option returned (2x-5x) for multiplying non-jackpot prizes.In October 2014,
Puerto Rico joined Powerball; the first mainly Spanish-speaking jurisdiction offering the game; as of 2016 it had not
joined Mega Millions.

2015 format change

On October 4, 2015, the Powerball format changed again; the white-ball pool increased from 59 to 69 while the Powerball
pool decreased from 35 to 26. While this improved the chance of winning any prize to 1 in 24, it also lengthened the
jackpot odds to 1 in 292,201,338. The 4+1 prize became $50,000; the 10x PowerPlay became available in drawings with a
jackpot of under $150 million. Three months later, the format produced a $1.5 billion jackpot, double the previous
record, after 20 consecutive rollovers.

2020 COVID-19 adjustments and 2021 removal by Idaho

On April 2, 2020, the Powerball starting jackpot amount was temporarily reset from $40 million to $20 million with the
annuity option, with at least a $2 million rollover for each drawing without a jackpot winner, due to the COVID-19
pandemic in the United States. This was done to enforce social distancing and discourage crowding of selling venues for
large jackpots, and to account for lower interest rates.On March 10, 2021, following Powerball's move to expand its
operations in Australia later that year and in the United Kingdom in 2022, the Idaho Legislature voted overwhelmingly to
end the state's participation in the lottery after more than 30 years. State lawmakers cited fears of outside revenue
being generated from the foreign involvement as reasons behind the vote. The removal will take place when non-US
jurisdictions are allowed to join; it was originally scheduled in August 2021 but was delayed as plans for international
expansion are indefinite.On May 23, 2021, Powerball announced that starting on August 23, 2021, draws would occur on
Monday, in addition to Wednesday and Saturday. All other features remain the same. Michele Lyles became the third
regular hostess of the Powerball drawings serving alongside Arlen and Johnson. Beginning in 2022, Randy Trainor serves
as a substitute host if neither Arlen, Johnson or Lyles are available.

Playing the game

Basic game
The minimum Powerball bet is $2. In each game, players select five numbers from a set of 69 white balls and one number
from 26 red Powerballs; the red ball number can be the same as one of the white balls. The drawing order of the five
white balls is irrelevant; all tickets show the white ball numbers in ascending order. Players cannot use the drawn
Powerball to match one of their white numbers, or vice versa. Players can select their own numbers, or have the terminal
pseudorandomly select the numbers (the name for this varies by state, but most are called some variation of "quick pick"
, "easy pick", etc.).

In each drawing, winning numbers are selected using two ball machines: one containing the white balls and the other
containing the red Powerballs. Five white balls are drawn from the first machine and the red ball from the second
machine. Games matching at least three white balls or the red Powerball win.

Two identical machines are used for each drawing, randomly selected from four sets. The model of machine used is the
Halogen, manufactured by Smartplay International of Edgewater Park, New Jersey. There are eight ball sets (four of each
color); one set of each color is randomly selected before a drawing. The balls are mixed by a turntable at the bottom of
the machine that propels the balls around the chamber. When the machine selects a ball, the turntable slows to catch it,
sends it up the shaft, and then down the rail to the display. (The Florida Lottery is considering switching to a random
number generator in 2019 for its in-state drawings; it is unknown whether Powerball would be affected.) If the onsite
location is unavailable, as was the case during Hurricane Michael, a backup machine is located at MUSL headquarters in
Iowa. The drawings are supervised by Carol & Company, CPA.

In 1992, there were 45 Pick 5 White Balls and 45 Pick 1 Red balls giving players a 1 in 54 million chance of the
jackpot.

Over the years the number of balls continued to change until in 2015 with 69 Pick 5 White balls and 26 Pick 1 Red balls
decreasing the chance of winning to 1 in 292 million.

Since Powerball is $2 per play, it now takes $584 million (not counting Power Play side bets) on average to produce a
jackpot-winning ticket.

Power Play
For an additional $1 per game, a player may activate the Power Play option. Activating it multiplies lower-tier
winnings (base prize $50,000 or less) by up to 5, or 10 when the jackpot is under $150 million. Power Play is drawn
separately from the 6 numbers. The 5+0 prize is automatically doubled to $2 million if Power Play is activated.
The dilemma for players is whether to maximize the chance at the jackpot or increase lower-tier winnings. If a player
selects a fixed amount of money to spend on tickets at a certain time, the player will give up one guess of the winning
set of numbers every two times this player activates Power Play in respect of one of the purchased tickets.
Power Play, when it began in 2001, was drawn with a special wheel. In 2006 and 2007, MUSL replaced one of the 5× spaces
on the Power Play wheel with a 10×. During each month-long promotion, MUSL guaranteed that there would be at least one
drawing with a 10× multiplier. The promotion returned in 2008; the ball landed in the 10× space twice. After being
absent in 2009, the 10× multiplier returned in May 2010 (after the Power Play drawing was changed to RNG.) The promotion
was extended for the only time, as the 10× multiplier was not drawn until June 12, 2010. The second prize 5× guarantee
continued; the 10× applied to all non-jackpot prizes, as in previous promotions.
Power Play's success has led to similar multipliers in other games, most notably Megaplier, available through all Mega
Millions members except California. The 2012 Powerball changes resulted in all eight lower-tier levels having "fixed"
Power Play prizes. On January 19, 2014, PowerPlay was modified; it used 30 balls.

Double Play
A Double Play option is available in 13 states and Puerto Rico. For an additional $1, players may reuse their Powerball
numbers in a second drawing with a different prize structure held approximately 30 minutes after the main drawing. A
Powerball ticket with the Double Play option costs $3; if both the Power Play and Double Play options are chosen the
total cost is $4.

Prizes and odds
Payouts as of October 7, 2015:
Overall odds of winning a prize are 1 in 24.87.

All non-jackpot prizes are fixed amounts (except in California); they may be reduced and paid on a parimutuel basis,
with each member paying differing amounts for the same prize tier, if the liability exceeds the funds in the prize pool
for any game member.

Jackpot accumulation and payment options

Jackpot winners have the option of receiving their prize in cash (in two installments; one from the winning
jurisdiction, then the combined funds from the other members) or as a graduated annuity paid in 30 yearly installments.
The pre-tax amount of the first annuity payment is approximately 1.505% of the jackpot amount. Each annuity payment is
5% higher than in the previous year to adjust for inflation.The advertised estimated jackpot represents the total
payments that would be paid to jackpot winner(s) should they accept the annuity option. This estimate is based on the
funds accumulated in the jackpot pool rolled over from prior drawings, expected sales for the next drawing, and market
interest rates for the securities that would be used to fund the annuity. The estimated jackpot usually is 32.5% of
the (non-Power Play) revenue of each base ($1) play, submitted by game members to accumulate into a prize pool to fund
the jackpot. If the jackpot is not won in a particular drawing, the prize pool carries over to the next drawing,
accumulating until there is a jackpot winner. This prize pool is the cash that is paid to a jackpot winner if they
choose cash. If the winner chooses the annuity, current market rates are used to calculate the graduated payment
schedule and the initial installment is paid. The remaining funds in the prize pool are invested to generate the income
required to fund the remaining installments. If there are multiple jackpot winners for a drawing, the jackpot prize pool
is divided equally for all such plays.

MUSL and its members accept all investment risk and are contractually obligated and liable to the winner to make all
scheduled payments to annuity winners. If a jackpot ticket is not claimed, the funds in the prize pool are returned to
members in proportion to the amount they contributed to the prize pool. The members have different rules regulating how
unclaimed funds are used.When the Powerball jackpot is won, the next jackpot is guaranteed to be $20 million (annuity).
If a jackpot is not won, the minimum rollover is $10 million. The cash in the jackpot pool is guaranteed to be the
current value of the annuity. If revenue from ticket sales falls below expectations, game members must contribute
additional funds to the jackpot pool to cover the shortage; the most likely scenario where this can occur is if the
jackpot is won in consecutive drawings.

Because of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States and resulting drop in ticket sales plus the falling interest rates
on which annuity prizes were based, Powerball administrators reduced the minimum starting jackpot to $20 million, and
the minimum increase to $2 million when the previous jackpot is not won.

Claiming prizes

A winning ticket must be claimed in the jurisdiction in which it was purchased, regardless of residence. The minimum age
to play Powerball is 18, except in Nebraska (19), and Arizona, Iowa, Louisiana and Mississippi (21).
Generally, Powerball players do not have to choose cash or annuity unless they win a jackpot (then they usually have 60
days to choose). Exceptions include Florida and Missouri; the 60-day "clock" starts with the drawing, so a jackpot
winner who wishes to take the cash option needs to make immediate plans to claim their prize. New Jersey and Texas
require the cash/annuity choice to be made when playing; in New Jersey, an annuity ticket can be changed to cash after
winning, while in Texas, the choice is binding. (When the cash option was introduced in 1997, all Powerball players had
to make the choice when playing. This regulation was phased out by 1999.) All Powerball prizes must be claimed within a
period ranging from 90 days to a year, depending on where the ticket was bought.
Powerball winnings in California are subject to Federal income tax only. Conversely, Powerball winnings in Puerto Rico
are not subject to Federal Income Tax, only local tax. There is no state income tax in Florida, South Dakota, Texas,
Washington and Wyoming, and only on interest and dividends in Tennessee and New Hampshire. In all other states, winnings
are subject to both federal income tax and that state's income tax, provided the winning ticket was purchased in the
winner's home state. Winnings from tickets purchased outside of one's home state may be subject to the income tax laws
of both states (with possible credit based on the two jurisdictions), though this depends on the states in question.

Secondary prizes

Unlike the jackpot pool, other prizes are the responsibility and liability of each participating lottery. All revenue
for Powerball ticket sales not used for jackpots is retained by each member; none of this revenue is shared with other
lotteries. Members are liable only for the payment of secondary prizes sold there.
Since the secondary prizes are defined in fixed amounts (except in California), if the liability for a given prize level
exceed the funds in the prize pool for that level the amount of the prize may be reduced and the prize pool be
distributed on a parimutuel basis and result in a prize lower than the fixed amounts given in the prize tables. Because
the secondary prize pools are calculated independently, it is possible lower-tier prizes will differ among the game
members.

Notable wins

Because the quoted jackpot amount is an annuity of 30 graduated annual payments, its cash value relative to the annuity
fluctuates. The actual ratio depends on projected interest rates and other factors. MUSL starts with the cash value,
built from a percentage of sales, and then calculates the advertised jackpot amount from that value, based on the
average costs of the three best securities bids.On March 27, 2019, a single ticket purchased in Wisconsin was the only
winner of a $768.4 million ($477 million cash) Powerball jackpot, the third largest in U.S. lottery history. The winner
of the enormous prize was identified as a 24-year-old Wisconsin man.On August 23, 2017, the owner of a Powerball ticket
sold in Chicopee, Massachusetts won more than $750 million, one of the largest prizes in the lottery's history. a mother
of two from Massachusetts was the lucky winner.On January 13, 2016, the world's largest lottery jackpot, an annuity of
approximately $1.586 billion, was split among three Powerball tickets in Chino Hills, California, Melbourne Beach,
Florida and Munford, Tennessee, each worth $528.8 million. Since there is no income tax in Florida or Tennessee (and
California does not tax lottery winnings), the cash option after Federal withholdings is $187.2 million each.On May 18,
2013, the world's largest one-ticket jackpot, an annuity of approximately $590.5 million ($687 million today), was won
by a Powerball ticket sold in Zephyrhills, Florida. On June 5, Florida Lottery officials announced the winner who
purchased the "quick pick" ticket at a Publix supermarket. the winner chose the cash option of approximately $370.8
million, before Federal withholding; Florida does not have a state income tax.Other winners in excess of $250 million:
On December 25, 2002, the president of a construction firm in Putnam County, West Virginia, won $314.9 million ($474
million today), then a new record for a single ticket in an American lottery. The winner chose the cash option of $170
million, receiving approximately $83 million after West Virginia and Federal withholdings. On October 19, 2005, a family
from Jacksonville, Oregon won $340 million ($472 million today). The winners chose the cash payout of $164.4 million (
before withholdings), smaller than a previous winners cash payout in 2002 due to a then-recent change in the annuity
structure.

A jackpot of $365 million ($491 million today) was won on February 18, 2006 by one ticket in Nebraska. It was shared by
eight people who worked at a meatpacking plant. The group chose the cash option of approximately $177.3 million, before
withholdings.

On August 25, 2007, a jackpot worth $314 million ($410 million today) was won by a retired auto worker from Ohio; that
ticket was bought in Richmond, Indiana, a community that had previously sold a jackpot-winning ticket of over $200
million.In November 2011, three Greenwich, Connecticut, financial executives shared a jackpot of $254.2 million ($306
million today), the largest prize on a Connecticut-bought ticket. Choosing the cash option, the men split nearly $104
million after withholdings. The jackpot, at the time, was the 12th largest in Powerball history.

Fortune cookie payout

The Powerball drawing on March 30, 2005, produced 110 second-prize winners. The total payout to these winners was $19.4
million, with 89 winners receiving $100,000 each, while the other 21 winners received $500,000 each as they were Power
Play selections. MUSL officials initially suspected fraud or a reporting error. However, all 110 winners had played
numbers from fortune cookies made by Wonton Food Inc. of Long Island City, New York. The factory had printed the
numbers "22, 28, 32, 33, 39, 40" on thousands of fortunes. The "40" in the fortune did not match the Powerball number,
None of the employees of Wonton Food played those numbers; at the time, the closest game member was Connecticut.
Since the ticket holders had won as result of a coincidence rather than foul play, the payouts were made. Had the
fortune
cookie given 42 as the Powerball number, these winners would have shared the $25 million jackpot: each $227,272 annuity
or $122,727 cash (before withholdings). The fortune on the cookie read: "All the preparation you've done will finally be
paying off."

Computers and slot machines

In 2006, WMS Gaming released a range of slot machines under the Powerball brand name. In 2007, the Oregon Lottery
released a Windows Sidebar gadget that displays the winning numbers for Powerball in real-time. The gadget also provides
large jackpot announcements.

The New York Lottery introduced a Powerball scratchcard in 2010. Five winning numbers plus a Powerball were printed
across the top of the card, with 12 opportunities to match. Matching the winning numbers or the Powerball won. The top
prize was $1 million (annuity); unlike actual Powerball, there was no cash option for the top prize.

Thanks for listen to spokewiki, Powerball was recorded November 6, 2022.